Good afternoon, welcome.
Um, we have you, uh, this afternoon, um, back again, uh,
this time for the, uh, end
review of the Children's Commissioner.
Uh, so we have 30 minutes with you this afternoon.
Um, please, um, make some open statements.
Then we'll move your questions from Emmas
And Mr. Chair.
Uh,
it's a great privilege
and responsibility to serve New Zealand's children
and young people as their children's Commissioner.
I welcome this opportunity to discuss our work
with you today relating to the financial year 24 25.
I'm exceptionally grateful for the work of Sonya Marshall,
our executive director who joins me today,
and our team at Manana who weave their skills every day
for the benefit of our nation's children and young people.
When I took up the role initially
as Chief Children's Commissioner
and November, 2023, I made a public commitment
to New Zealand's children
and young people that I would serve in this role by always
ensuring my advocacy is grounded in their voices
and their lived experiences,
that I would be genuinely connected with them,
championing their rights, informed by the wider data
and evidence, and advocating for decision making
that upholds children and young people's rights and,
and advances their everyday thriving.
Because that is the opportunity that we have together
as a nation to ensure that all Moana, that's all children
and young people, are growing up, thriving
to their full potential, loved, safe, and well every day.
I am proud of the work that my team
and I have done over the year in review in a range of ways
and on the issues that matter most to Ana.
Our work over the year has been delivered while navigating
change to our entity,
holding steady OnCourse towards our strategic vision
that all Ana in New Zealand live their best lives.
I acknowledge with gratitude the work
of my previous board colleagues.
They have made a significant collective contribution
to strengthening the work
of the Children's Commissioner in service
of New Zealand's Cola.
Over the year under review, we've significantly
progressed our strategic commitments to step Up team up
and speak up for
and with Ana, always with them at the center
of all we do our annual report, which I trust you have, uh,
reflects this, and
that all measured outcome areas have been fully achieved
against our statement of performance expectations.
This year, our independent advocacy has
covered a range of issues.
While focusing strongly on the rights of Mo Maori
and the needs of mouna experiencing disadvantage,
I've led out on holding decision makers accountable
for progress for children, including
as the advocate within the oversight of Ang Tamari system.
I've been publicly lifting the profile of some
of the mo biggest challenges for children,
including child maltreatment, child poverty,
and barriers to thriving mental health, bringing clarity,
focus, and solutions to children's issues at the national
and systemic level.
Over the past year, a number of instances
of child harm have been prevented through the work
of our organization
as a national preventative mechanism under the optional
protocol to the Convention against torture with systemic
and facility level improvements made for Ana
who are deprived of their liberty Over the year,
we've also upped our focus on ensuring that
children's rights knowledge is more available
and accessible to children in new ways,
including piloting new age appropriate, colorful, uh,
UN convention on the rights
of the child resources co-designed with Moana,
which they love and which educators are using too.
And I have a copy of, uh, the UN Convention for each of you,
which I'm going to leave for you today.
I want to acknowledge all of the Moana, the Whanau, iwi,
hapu communities, organizations, public sector entities,
and agencies, ministers of the Crown,
and all of the parliamentarians who I've worked
with over the past year.
Everything that I do
and my team does is focused on having impact for
and with Moana every week of the year,
championing their rights independently to you
and others who are decision makers, bringing the needs
of Moana into the light.
I look forward to continuing to strengthen Manana Moana
as a world leading independent children's rights
institution, and I'm grateful to all
of the decision makers such as yourselves who have engaged
with me over the past year,
and I really welcome our discussion today.
Oh, thank you very much, Bert. Um, first question,
Kilda, thank you.
Thank you for all of the mahi, uh, that you do for our
and your strong advocacy.
It's really appreciated by this committee.
I first wanted to ask you questions about the government's
military style academies, uh, the pilot
of which ran in the period that we are reviewing,
and as we learned at the scrutiny week hearings, the
government's intention to run another voluntary, um,
military style academy potentially starting in March.
Um, can you please speak to that?
So, yes, I am aware of, um, the government's, uh,
well orang tamaris, um, plan to run, uh,
this military style academy in the new year.
Um, I was informed of that by Orang Tamari.
Um, I have expressed to Oranga Tamari
that I was somewhat surprised, um, that that, uh,
that continuation
of the Military Style Academy is happening in the New year,
despite the young serious offender legislation, um,
still going through, um,
the parliamentary process through the house.
Mm. And in terms of your,
can you explain why you were, um, surprised?
Uh, I guess
because I felt that, uh,
that legislation is still in train.
It's still, uh, working its way
through the parliamentary process.
And so, um, to have Ang
or this government, uh,
'cause it's got approval from treasury
to bring forward the money to be used for another voluntary,
uh, military style academy.
Do you have any thoughts or concerns about that?
What I, um, am keen to discuss
with Oranga Tamari a bit more is how the second, uh,
program is going to be really strongly informed
by the findings of the independent
evaluation that was undertaken.
Um, I already have had a briefing from Oranga Tamari about,
um, the early findings of that evaluation
before it was published, which has been really helpful
for me to understand, uh, some of the areas of improvement.
Um, I guess in terms of the legislation itself,
I remain concerned, uh, as I, I have made very clear
through the parliamentary process, um, around a few aspects
of that legislation, uh, including
that I don't believe it is necessary
or required to introduce a young serious offender category
into our criminal law in New Zealand.
I believe that the law as it stands, um, is,
uh, fit for purpose.
Um, and also that, um, the difference between, uh,
voluntary, uh, military style academy participation
and, uh, uh, sentenced
or enforced, uh, military style, um, participation.
There are some inherent differences there. So,
I, I just had one final mate.
Um, when did you receive that briefing?
Uh, it was just prior to the evaluation, um,
being published, I think.
So regarding, thank you.
Um, so currently, um,
once a program has started
or is being implemented, you do a visit
and you identify any breaches, um, in obligations
and then recommend what needs to be changed
to the existing model or system.
Um, just following on from Willow jean's questions around,
um, can you
get in there before these programs are implemented?
So it sounds like you've, you've had a briefing on it,
but I'm sure the government would want to know any red flags
before any harm is going to be, um, inflicted upon children.
So I guess what I'm asking is, is there a mechanism
and do you go in and identify red flags
before a program or something is implemented?
So just to make it absolutely clear, I am aware
of no harm having been inflicted on any of the Ram mm-hmm.
Who were participants in the Military Style
Academy, um, this year.
So really want to make that clear, first of all, um,
to avoid any confusion, um, in terms of our monitoring
that we do as a national preventative mechanism under the
optional protocol to the Convention against Torture.
Mm. Um, that monitoring is done on a, a, um,
regular cycle and basis when we monitor facilities.
Mm-hmm. And so those are all orang,
youth Justice Facilities, care
and Protection residences, uh, community based remand homes,
iwi, remand homes, uh,
youth forensic mental health facilities
and disability units.
We monitor the facility
and what is happening, uh, for young people, children
and young people who are deprived
of their liberty in those facilities.
Mm-hmm. Our monitoring is undertaken under, uh, a range
of domains, um, which are consistent with the, uh,
association for the prevention of torches, um,
monitoring domains,
and also a lens around the rights of Maori given, uh, we are
ro in New Zealand, we do not monitor
specific programs that occur within those facilities.
Mm-hmm. So it's not our role
as a op cap national preventative mechanism
to be monitoring a specific program such
as the Military style Academy.
Right. Uh, if we are monitoring at the facility
that the Military Style Academy is running it, then
of course we will, um, that will form part
of our observations
because of the fact that that is running at that facility.
So, before go on a new question,
we do have a few questions, Wayne.
Oh, yeah. Do you want a new question? Uh, yes, I would.
Okay. Your question as well. Um, okay. Thank you so much.
Um, just moving into, uh,
the, the new process that you've been talking about,
about if recommendations have made,
how will you then know when they're being implemented
and the timeframes that you're expecting them
to be implemented in?
I understand that you are, um, uh,
working on a new tracking system for this.
Can you talk to us about how that will be implemented
and give us timeframes?
So, um, I know
that in here it's like there is immediate things that need
to happen, so you, you go straight to them
and, um, then wait for the more fullsome report to come out
so that any harm that's been, um, any kids
that might be in possible harm are being dealt with.
So, um, can you tell us about the timeframes
and about that new, um, system of monitoring
and really what is the process when recommendations are not
being implemented, which we have seen through, um, your,
your report here is particularly around, um,
those residences for young people.
Mr. Chair, can the member,
please clarify if she's referring
to our op cap monitoring in general as a whole,
rather than just talking about the
military style Academy? Yes,
I am. Sorry. It's a new line
of questioning.
So, because you've done this review right,
this five year review, you've, um, looked into what you've,
you've done previously.
So is it, is it, is it, is it, is it generally?
Yeah. Thank you. Yes. Um, I can speak to those aspects.
So in terms of, um, the timeframes for, uh,
implementation of our recommendations,
ultimately we can't enforce a timeframe on, um,
the relevant agency or facility.
It is up to the relevant agency
and facility to set that timeframe.
Um, but something
that I have been focused on since coming into my role is
ensuring that we have a more transparent way of holding
agencies and facilities accountable for.
So we make these recommendations,
what have you actually done with them?
Mm-hmm. Um, because the vast majority of our recommendations
that we, we make as an NPM are accepted, um,
by the agencies, which is good.
Um, it shows a real, uh, willingness to improve
and optimize, which we want to see.
Um, and so if I can hone in on, uh, the work
that we've been doing with Oranga Tamari
around youth justice facilities, uh,
what we have seen over the past year is Ang Tamari, um,
putting in place a transparent dashboard tracking
of those recommendations that is helping us to be able
to see in real time the progress that's happening on some
of those recommendations.
And we have been pleased to see, uh,
some progress being made.
Is there still room for improvement? Yes, absolutely.
Um, and has agreed with me on that.
Um, you also asked about when recommendations are not
implemented, uh, will, that's our role to keep, uh,
raising them with the relevant agencies, which we do.
Um, we have regular, um, meetings with the
relevant detaining agencies
and continue to bring both the systemic level
recommendations and facility level recommendations
to their attention.
And then one last, um, comment that I wish to make is that,
um, recently New Zealand, uh,
had a visit from the subcommittee for the Prevention
of Torture, um, as a group of opca chairs.
So those are the, um, opca national preventative mechanisms.
Um, we have had a, a good robust discussion
around the importance of tracking our recommendations,
and we are looking at what some best practice, um,
globally, uh, looks like.
So as a, a group of opca national preventative mechanisms,
um, this will continue to be, uh, an area of focus for us.
Thank you. So Andrew Ellen, um,
mine's not a supplement, sorry.
It's primary supplement. I'll come. Okay. Come back.
I've got a quick supplementary on on actually, just in terms
of that, that, um, overall view.
You, you talk, the work that you do and
and analyzing what's happening is,
is the therapeutic work at form any part of that analysis?
Absolutely. So, um, we look at the material conditions
that are occurring for, um, children
and young people in these facilities.
We also look at aspects such as their education, provision
of health, um,
and throughout that we are looking at, um, what level
of therapeutic, um, support is being provided for children
and young people, um, in those facilities.
Fair to say that I think there is a significant room still
for improvement when it comes to therapeutic supports, um,
that really ensure that when children
and young people leave these facilities,
we ideally want them to be leaving, um,
with better support wrapped around them,
and so that, that can be, uh, sustainable
and enduring for them.
One particular area where I have highlighted to Orang,
tamari, um,
and also to other facilities that we monitor,
is the continued urgent need
for better therapeutic mental health support to be available
for all children and young people in those
facilities who need that.
Um, and also I highlight the intersection with high
and complex needs and disability support.
Um, so I'm really keen to continue to see those
agencies place a concerted effort on good mental health
support, appropriate disability support
and accommodation, uh,
and in ensuring
that all approaches in our facilities are therapeutic.
Um, because I think we can all agree
that the last thing we want in New Zealand is for children
and young people to be institutionalized in these places
where they are deprived of their liberty.
We need to ensure that the opportunity is taken
for the right therapeutic support to be wrapped around.
Great. Thank you. And supplementary, thank you.
I just have a couple of supplementaries on, um,
your opca monitoring
and reporting, uh, in scrutiny week, I asked
questions about the, uh, concerning number of
extension, illegal extensions to the use
of secure care.
Mm-hmm. Um, both in the youth justice facilities
and, um, was another one.
There were, um, between one January
and one July, 64 cases of illegal extensions.
Um, I, I'm, I'm interested in the issue overall,
but one of the facilities which is highlighted
that has this issue is,
and I also note your monitoring reports
and that, could you please speak to your concerns around
secure care, um, and these illegal extensions?
I am concerned about the, um, increasing use
of secure care across, um, these residences.
We need to understand that, um, residences, uh, in
and of themselves are places, as I say,
where young people are deprived of their liberty
and then secure care units within these facilities, uh,
spaces where young people are
isolated from other young people.
Um, they also don't always have access
to things like education, for example.
Um, and time in the main space of, um, the residents
recently myself, um, I was part of one
of our monitoring visits for a day of that.
Um, and I got to go
and spend time with young people
who were in the secure care unit
of a youth justice facility.
Um, and fair to say that I was concerned, um, by
the material nature of that environment.
Um, and also the lack of access to, um, contact with others,
um, accessibility of education.
Um, this young person that I was with had been in
that secure care space for I think four days at the time,
um, and was there
because they felt unsafe in the main area of the residents.
So I think there are, um,
and there are, are a number of situations like that,
that my team have seen over the course of the past year.
So I think we need to unpack, first of all, um,
the safety concerns for young people within residences.
We need to see an increased focus on making sure
that residences are at all times safe for children
and young people, uh, that relies on staff, uh,
having the right training and capability.
Um, it also, um, requires a need at what is the provision
of, um, those wider holistic supports
for young people if they are in secure care
such as education.
Just because they are in a secure care environment does not
mean they should be missing out on their right to education.
And then the other issue that I am concerned about
through our op camp monitoring is the, um,
in some cases a lack of documentation that supports, uh,
the grounds for young people being in secure care
and having those lengths
of time in secure care extended out.
So in a number of our monitoring reports over the past year,
we have made a recommendation to orang tamari, um,
that it really needs to lift its level of documentation
around the grounds, um, for those, um, times
and holding young people in secure care.
And just one supplement on that, um, what was
concerning about the answers to written questions
that I got is that it was after further training had been
provided that we still saw an increase in the illegal use
of, um, secure.
How urgent do you think this is, um, of an issue for
given, um, your role?
As for monitoring?
It is urgent. Uh,
and I think that it does highlight that, um, training
of staff in, uh, these facilities needs
to be both foundational and ongoing
because there is a difference between, I think
as we all know, you know, training
and education that's on paper,
and then how to actually apply that in practice, recognizing
that these are often very complex
and, uh, challenging environments to work in.
And so I think it's important that, um, that 42 million,
I think of funding, uh,
that was allocated in this year's budget, um, for training
and capability uplift in these, uh,
residences is really crucial, uh, to see
that ongoing building of capability so
that all young people can, um, be safe
and well supported, uh, in these facilities.
And just my final on that is, um, given the urgency of it
and the failure to address the issue over, you know, many,
um, reports, uh, what is your plan
to check in on the, um, action taken,
uh, regarding your recommendations and implementing mm-hmm.
The finals of your report?
Well, it continues to be a focus
through our op cap monitoring,
and it will continue to be a focus, uh,
also under our op cap mandate.
We do receive regular, um, packages of data
and updates on progress
and also situations in residences, um, that we can keep a,
a watch on, on an ongoing basis.
And so as long as we are not seeing the level of progress
that we want to, we will keep highlighting, um,
that issue to orang.
I do want to draw attention to the fact that in some
of the residences across the orang tamari ecosystem,
there are lower levels of use of secure and seclusion used.
That's good because it shows
that positive practice is possible.
And so that is what I will keep encouraging ang tamari
to look within its own practice and share those learnings.
Um, more actively continue
to share those learnings more actively
across the residents network.
New question, Warren. Well, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you team for your work
on behalf of our young people.
Um, you mentioned in your introductory comments the use
of data and this year has been a bit
of a standout year from, um, government agencies, entities
who have, um, started making a huge amount of use of IDI
and young data in general.
Um, so I was just wondering what data do you use
or gather, um, that is helping inform some
of the decisions that you are
making? And there are the gaps.
Thank you for the question.
Uh, I really like talking about data
because actually if we, um, we look at this document,
the Urine Convention on the Rights of the child, um, one
of the aspects that's important
to make children's rights real in practice is
that states parties that have signed up to the convention
have strong, what we call general measures of implementation
of, um, children's rights.
One of those general measures is good data about children,
um, about their lives, about their outcomes,
about their wellbeing, uh, in New Zealand, it's fair to say
that whilst we have some really strong sources
of data about children and their rights
and their outcomes still are some gaps.
Uh, and so one area that I can point to, for example, um,
is in the area of child maltreatment, as you are all aware
of, uh, last week launched a nationwide advocacy campaign
about this issue.
If we hone in on that issue, there is still no one place
that I can go to to access transparent,
verifiable data about the rate
of child homicide in New Zealand.
I have to piece that data together from a number
of different, uh, data sources.
So that's a good example of a gap
that it would be really helpful to, um,
to have filled the member raised.
Um, IDI data, I agree
that we should be making good use in ethical ways
of the data that we have available in New Zealand,
including IDI data.
But when it comes to children's lives, I always want
to see strong qualitative data sit alongside
that administrative data.
Because what admin data doesn't show us always when it comes
to children's lives, is that granularity, um,
of the lived reality
and the holistic picture
of what's going on in a child's life.
And so that's why when it comes to, uh, the changes
to the census, for example,
and some of the changes around child poverty, um,
statistics, I have voiced my concerns to stats New Zealand,
um, and advocated to them to ensure
that good qualitative data is always also available.
And something that we do in our work, uh,
as the children's Commissioner is to ensure that we are
talking directly with children
and young people to hear directly from them about
their lived realities.
We publish those findings, uh, in a range of reports
that bring forward their direct, uh, voices and experiences.
And so I'm proud to say that those reports
and findings have helped to inform, uh,
the government's child and youth strategy
that was published last year.
Uh, there is a direct correlation between what children
and young people have set
and the three, uh, priorities set out in
that strategy. Also, the, um,
Sorry. Sorry to interrupt. It's
important stuff,
but we have one minute left
and have three more questions, uh, at least.
So, um, did you have a quick,
We not just go on for a bit longer
Bit? Well, I need to wrap this
up.
Oh, you have to. Well, um, we were told
by Stats Museum when we were discussing data.
Mm-hmm. Um, and you raised the issue of mental health. Yes.
Is that, um, health is one of the challenging areas
to get really good data on.
And so you would agree with that comment?
Yes, I do. Um,
and we only have to look at, for example, data
around, um, yeah.
Youth suicide and mental health.
And we need to strengthen that data, um, to,
to better understand what's going on
for our children and young people.
Atory Health, I would, I just like, I,
I'm gonna spin off into Gloria Vale
'cause what I'm concerned about in the situation is there's
these little really hard problems
that just don't get attention
and may not with setting up systems like the social
investment strategy where the priorities are those
big picture, low hanging fruit.
Can you tell me, you came out clearly saying
that we need urgent action in that area.
Can you tell me about your advocacy in that area and,
and your concerns?
Just to clarify, what area are we? Gloria Bay. Gloria Bay.
Okay. Uh, you'll be aware about my, um, public calls Yes.
Around, uh, that's why
I'm asking The, the school.
Um, and that I made a call for the school to be closed.
Um, that is based on the findings of the education reviews,
uh, review officers, um, reports, um, to consecutive reports
that have found that the, uh, physical
and emotional safety of, of children and their wellbeing
and that school cannot be, um, guaranteed, I guess.
Uh, and so I know that there is a process
of decision making.
We are all aware that that is in train now.
Um, I, until, uh, the education Review Office is able
to show that, uh, those children are en
enjoying a physically and emotionally safe environment at
that school, I will continue to have concern. They're not
Safe at home either.
That's another issue, which I'm happy to te talk about.
If we have available time,
I'll have to, uh, last question, Jamie.
Uh, just, uh, your performance targets,
you are well exceeding what you are, um, wanting to,
so I'm just wondering, can you keep up that level
of activity and what,
what the impact you believe, uh, you're having? Mm.
Uh, look, we have high expectations for the work
that we do as an entity.
As I said, you know, take very seriously the role
that we play in terms of being the independent advocate
for all children and young people.
Um, we have been over the past couple of years going
through a significant period of change, uh, with, uh,
year on year legislative change as you'll appreciate
that has an impact on an organization.
Uh, our impact measures have been set at a realistic level,
but I'm pleased that we have exceeded them.
Uh, what we have done, uh, with our new, um,
performance measures for the coming, uh, the current year
that we are now in, um, is to ensure
that we have evolved those impact measures further
to make sure that we understand, um, the quality
of the work a bit better.
Um, so for example, the level of confidence, uh,
that young people feel
after they have, um,
experienced learning about their rights, um, those kinds
of impact measures.
So I look forward to, um,
bringing those forward next year. You
Look forward to seeing those next time. Can
I just add one comment to that, which is concurrently
to those things, we've implemented a new planning process
to better help us identify, uh, and,
and make better decisions about the amount
of work we're doing and what will drive impact.
Part of that process is actually reduced some
of the elements to our work program so that we can, um,
provide the sustainability from a KA staff wellbeing
perspective as well, which remains top of mind
as we head into another busy year next year. Thank
You. Oh, thank you,
Dr. Claire
and Sonia, uh, for appearing for money.
Thanks for your work doing. Thank you very much.
All very passionate about, uh,
kids. Have a great opportunity.
Thank you. Hope you have a great holiday.